Rule 10 Fouls and Penalties SECTION 1 ADMINISTRATIVE TECHNICAL A team shall not: ART. 1 . . . Fail to supply the scorer with the name and number of each team member who may participate and designate the five starting players at least 10 minutes before the scheduled starting time. PENALTY: (Art. 1) One foul for both requirements. Penalized when it occurs. ART. 2 . . . After the 10-minute time limit specified in Article 1: a. Change a designated starter unless necessitated as in Rule 3-2-2a. b. Add a name to the team member list. c. Require the scorer to change a team member's or player's number in the scorebook. d. Require a player to change to the number in the scorebook. e. Have identical numbers on team members and/or players. PENALTY: (Art. 2) One foul only per team regardless of the number of infrac- tions. (Art. 2a) Penalized if discovered before the ball becomes live to start the game. (Arts. 2b, c, d) Penalized when they occur. (Art. 2e) Penalized when discovered. Head coach does not lose the privilege of the coaching box. ART. 3 . . . Use a megaphone or any electronic communication device, or electronic equipment for voice communication with players on the court, or use electronic audio and/or video devices to request a review of a decision of the contest officials.

Rule 10-2 2023-24 NFHS Basketball Rules Page 66 ART. 4 . . . Fail to occupy the team members' bench to which it is assigned. PENALTY: (Section 1) Two free throws plus the ball for a division-line throw-in. (Arts. 3 & 4) Penalized when they occur. SECTION 2 TEAM TECHNICAL ART. 1 . . . Allow the game to develop into an actionless contest, this includes the following and similar acts: a. When the clock is not running consuming a full minute through not being ready when it is time to start either half. b. Delay the game by preventing the ball from being made promptly live or from being put in play. See Rules 7-5-1 and 8-1-2 for the resumption-of-play pro- cedure to use after a time-out or the intermission between quarters. The pro- cedure is used prior to charging a technical foul in these specific situations. c. Commit a violation of the throw-in boundary-line plane, as in Rule 9-2-10, after any team warning for delay. d. Contact with the free thrower or a huddle of two or more players in the lane by either team prior to a free throw following any team warning for delay. e. Interfering with the ball following a goal after any team warning for delay. f. Not having the court ready for play following any time-out after any team warning for delay. ART. 2 . . . Have more than five team players participating simultaneously. ART. 3 . . . Request an excess time-out. ART. 4 . . . Commit an unsporting foul. ART. 5 . . . Fail to have all players return to the court at approximately the same time following a time-out or intermission. ART. 6 . . . Allow players to lock arms or grasp a teammate(s) in an effort to restrict the movement of an opponent. PENALTY: (Section 2) Two free throws plus the ball for a division-line throw-in. (Arts. 1, 4, 5, 6) Penalized when they occur. (Art. 2) Penalized if discovered while being violated. (Art. 3) Penalized when discovered. Head coach does not lose the privilege of the coaching box. SECTION 3 SUBSTITUTE TECHNICAL A substitute shall not enter the court: ART. 1 . . . Without reporting to the scorer. ART. 2 . . . Without being beckoned by an official, except between quarters and during time-outs. PENALTY: (Section 3) Two free throws plus the ball for a division-line throw- in. One foul for either or both requirements. Penalized if discovered before the ball becomes live. NOTE: A single flagrant technical foul or the second technical foul charged to a substitute results in disqualification of the offender to the team bench.

Page 67 2023-2 4 NFHS Basketball Rules SECTION 4 PLAYER TECHNICAL A player shall not: ART. 1 . . . Participate after changing the player's number without reporting it to the scorer and an official. PENALTY: (Art. 1) Flagrant foul. Penalized if discovered while being violated. ART. 2 . . . Purposely and/or deceitfully delay returning after legally being out of bounds. ART. 3 . . . Grasp either basket at any time during the game except to prevent injury; dunk or stuff, or attempt to dunk or stuff a dead ball. ART. 4 . . . Illegally contact the backboard/ring by: a. Placing a hand on the backboard or ring to gain an advantage. b. Intentionally slapping or striking the backboard or causing the ring to vi- brate while a try or tap for field goal is in flight or is touching the backboard or is in the basket or in the cylinder above the basket. ART. 5 . . . Delay the game by acts such as: a. Preventing the ball from being made live promptly or from being put in play. b. Failing, when in possession, to immediately pass the ball to the nearer offi- cial when a whistle sounds. c. The free thrower fails to be in the free-throw semicircle when the official is ready to administer the free throw unless the resumption-of-play procedure is in effect following a time-out or intermission. d. Repeated violations of the throw-in, as in Rule 9-2-10. ART. 6 . . . Commit an unsporting foul. This includes, but is not limited to, acts or conduct such as: a. Disrespectfully addressing or contacting an official or gesturing in such a manner as to indicate resentment. b. Using profane or inappropriate language or obscene gestures. c. Baiting or taunting an opponent. NOTE: The NFHS disapproves of any form of taunting which is intended or designed to embarrass, ridicule or demean others under any circumstances including on the basis of race, religion, gender or national origin. d. Purposely obstructing an opponent's vision by waving or placing hand(s) near an opponent's eyes. NOTE: Purposely diverting an opponent's attention by waving is different than hold- ing or waving the hands near the opponent's eyes for the express purpose of ob- structing the vision so that the opponent cannot see. e. Climbing on or lifting a teammate to secure greater height. f. Faking being fouled, knowingly attempting a free throw or accepting a foul to which the player was not entitled. g. Using alcohol, or any form of tobacco product (e-cigarette or similar items) beginning with arrival at the competition site until departure following the completion of the contest. h. Removing the jersey and/or pants/skirt within the visual confines of the playing area. Rule 10-4

Rule 10-5 2023-24 NFHS Basketball Rules Page 68 i. Leaving the playing court for an unauthorized reason to demonstrate re- sentment, disgust or intimidation. ART. 7 . . . Intentionally or flagrantly contacting an opponent when the ball is dead and such contact is not a personal foul. ART. 8 . . . Be charged with fighting. PENALTY: (Art. 8) Flagrant foul. ART. 9 . . . Commit goaltending during a free throw. ART. 10 . . . Reach through the throw-in boundary-line plane and touch or dislodge the ball as in Rule 9-2 PENALTY 3. PENALTY: (Section 4) Two free throws plus the ball for a division-line throw-in. NOTE: A single flagrant technical foul or the second technical foul charged to a player results in disqualification of the offender to the team bench. SECTION 5 BENCH TECHNICAL The head coach is responsible for personal conduct and behavior, as well as substitutes, disqualified team members and all other bench personnel. Bench per- sonnel, including the head coach, shall not: ART. 1 . . . Commit an unsporting foul. This includes, but is not limited to, acts or conduct such as: a. Disrespectfully addressing an official. b. Attempting to influence an official's decision. c. Using profane or inappropriate language or obscene gestures. d. Disrespectfully addressing, baiting or taunting an opponent. NOTE: The NFHS disapproves of any form of taunting which is intended or designed to embarrass, ridicule or demean others under any circumstances including on the basis of race, religion, gender or national origin. e. Objecting to an official's decision by rising from the bench or using gestures. f. Inciting undesirable crowd reactions. g. Being charged with fighting. h. Removing the jersey and/or pants/skirt within the visual confines of the playing area. i. Grasping either basket except to prevent injury; dunking or attempting to dunk or stuff a dead ball. ART. 2 . . . Enter the court unless by permission of an official to attend an injured player. ART. 3 . . . Use alcohol, or any form of tobacco product (e-cigarette or similar items) beginning with arrival at the competition site until departure following the completion of the contest. ART. 4 . . . Stand at the team bench while the clock is running or is stopped, and shall remain seated, except: a. The head coach as in Rule 10-6-1. b. When a team member is reporting to the scorer's table. c. During a charged time-out, as in Rule 5-11, or the intermission between quarters and extra periods.

