Rule 10-6 d. To spontaneously react to an outstanding play by a team member or to ac- knowledge a replaced player(s), but shall immediately return to their seats. PENALTY:(Arts.1a,b,d,e,f,2,4)Theofficialsmay warn the head coach unless the offense is judged to be major, in which case a technical foul shall be ruled. (Arts. 1, 2, 3, 4) Two free throws plus the ball for a division-line throw-in. If the head coach is the offender, the foul is charged directly to the head coach. The foul is charged to the offender (if not the head coach) and also charged indirectly to the head coach. (Art. 1g) Flagrant foul, the offender is disqualified. If the of- fender is bench personnel, each foul is also charged indirectly to the head coach. ART. 5 . . . Leave the confines of the bench during a fight or when a fight may occur. EXCEPTION: The head coach and any number of assistant coaches may enter the court in the situation where a fight may break out – or has broken out – to prevent the situation from escalating. PENALTY: (Art. 5) Flagrant foul, disqualification of individual offender, but only one technical foul penalty is administered regardless of the number of of- fenders. This one foul is also charged indirectly to the head coach. If the head coach is an offender, an additional flagrant technical foul is charged directly to the head coach and penalized. When a simultaneous technical foul(s) by opponents occurs, the free throws are not awarded when the penalties offset. NOTE: A single flagrant foul or the second technical foul charged to any bench personnel, other than the head coach, results in disqualification of the offender. A single flagrant foul, the second direct technical foul or the third technical (any combination of direct or indirect) charged to the head coach results in disqualification and ejection. Ejected adult bench per- sonnel shall leave the vicinity (out of sight and sound) of the playing area immediately and are prohibited from any further contact (direct or indirect) with the team during the remainder of the game. Failure to comply with the rules of ejection may result in the game being forfeited. SECTION 6 HEAD COACH'S RULE ART. 1 . . . The head coach shall remain seated on the team bench, except: a. By state association adoption, the head coach may stand within the des- ignated coaching box described in Rule 1-13-2. The first technical foul charged directly or indirectly to the head coach results in loss of coach- ing-box privileges and the head coach shall remain seated for the remainder of the game, except as stated below in Rule 10-6-1b, c, d and e. b. The head coach may stand within the coaching box to request a time-out or signal players to request a time-out. c. The head coach may stand and/or leave the coaching box to confer with personnel at the scorer's table to request a time-out as in Rule 5-8-4. d. The head coach may stand within the coaching box to replace or remove a disqualified/injured player or player directed to leave the game. e. The head coach may stand as in Rule 10-5-4c, d. EXCEPTION: The head coach, and any number of assistant coaches, may enter the court in the situation where a fight may break out – has broken out – to prevent the situation from escalating.

Rule 10-7 2023-24 NFHS Basketball Rules Page 70 ART. 2 . . . The head coach shall replace or remove a disqualified/injured play- er, or player directed to leave the game, within 15 seconds when a substitute is available. ART. 3 . . . The head coach shall not permit a team member to participate after being removed from the game for disqualification. ART. 4 . . . The head coach shall not permit a team member to participate while wearing an illegal uniform. (3-4) ART. 5 . . . The head coach shall not permit team members to leave the bench area and/or playing court for an unauthorized reason. PENALTY: (Art. 1) The official may warn the head coach unless the offense is judged to be major, in which case a technical foul shall be ruled. (Section 6) Two free throws plus the ball for a division-line throw-in. The foul is charged directly to the head coach. (Arts. 3, 5) Penalized if discovered while being violated. (Art. 4) Penalized when discovered. (Arts. 4, 5) Only one technical foul is charged regardless of the number of offenders. NOTE: A single flagrant foul, the second direct technical foul or the third technical (any combination of direct or indirect) charged to the head coach results in disqualification and ejection. Ejected adult bench personnel shall leave the vicinity (out of sight and sound) of the playing area immediately and are prohibited from any further contact (direct or indirect) with the team during the remainder of the game. Failure to comply with the rules of ejection may result in the game being forfeited. SECTION 7 CONTACT ART. 1 . . . A player shall not hold, push, charge, trip or impede the progress of an opponent by extending arm(s), shoulder(s), hip(s) or knee(s), or by bending the body into other than a normal position; nor use any rough tactics. ART. 2 . . . A player shall not contact an opponent with the hand unless such contact is only with the opponent's hand while it is on the ball and is incidental to an attempt to play the ball. ART. 3 . . . A player shall not use the hands on an opponent in any way that inhibits the freedom of movement of the opponent or acts as an aid to a player in starting or stopping. ART. 4 . . . A player shall not extend the arm(s) fully or partially other than vertically so that freedom of movement of an opponent is hindered when contact with the arms occurs. A player may hold the hand(s) and arm(s) in front of the player's own face or body for protection and to absorb force from an imminent charge by an opponent. ART. 5 . . . A player shall not use the forearm and/or hand to prevent an oppo- nent from attacking the ball during a dribble or when throwing for goal. ART. 6 . . . Contact caused by a defensive player who approaches from behind is pushing; contact caused by the momentum of a player who has thrown for a goal is charging.

Page 71 2023-2 4 NFHS Basketball Rules Rule 10-7 ART. 7 . . . A dribbler shall neither charge into nor contact an opponent in the dribbler's path nor attempt to dribble between two opponents or between an opponent and a boundary, unless the space is such as to provide a reasonable chance for the dribbler to go through without contact. ART. 8 . . . When a dribbler, without contact, sufficiently passes an opponent to have head and shoulders in advance of that opponent, the greater responsibility for subsequent contact is on the opponent. ART. 9 . . . When a dribbler is moving in a straight-line path, the dribbler may not be crowded out of that path, but if an opponent is able to legally obtain a de- fensive position in that path, the dribbler shall avoid contact by changing direction or ending the dribble. ART. 10 . . . The dribbler is not permitted additional rights in executing a jump try for field goal, pivoting, feinting or in beginning a dribble. ART. 11 . . . A player shall adhere to the rules pertaining to illegal contact, including but not limited to, guarding as in Rule 4-23, rebounding as in Rule 4-37, screening as in Rule 4-40, and verticality as in Rule 4-45. ART. 12 . . . The following acts constitute a foul when committed against a ball handler dribbler. A player becomes a ball handler when that player receives the ball. This would include a player in a post position. a. Placing two hands on the player. b. Placing an extended arm bar on the player. c. Placing and keeping a hand on the player. d. Contacting the player more than once with the same hand or alternating hands. PENALTY: (Section 7) Offender is charged with one foul, and if it is the player's fifth foul (personal and technical) or if it is flagrant, the player is disqualified.