Rule 6 Live Ball and Dead Ball SECTION 1 LIVE BALL ART. 1 . . . The game and each extra period shall be started by a jump ball in the center restraining circle. After any subsequent dead ball, the only way to get the ball live is to resume play by a jump ball in the center restraining circle, by a throw-in or by a free throw. The dribble and traveling rules are not in effect in these situations. ART. 2 . . . The ball becomes live when: a. On a jump ball, the tossed ball leaves the official's hand(s). b. On a throw-in, it is at the disposal of the thrower. c. On a free throw, it is at the disposal of the free thrower. NOTE: Any rules statement is made on the assumption that no infraction is involved unless mentioned or implied. If such infraction occurs, the rule governing it is followed. For example, a game or extra period will not start with a jump ball if a foul occurs before the ball becomes live. SECTION 2 STARTING GAME/QUARTER/EXTRA PERIOD ART. 1 . . . The game, quarter and each extra period begins when the ball becomes live as specified in Rule 6-1-2 for a jump ball, throw-in or free throw. ART. 2 . . . To start the game and each extra period, the ball shall be put in play in the center restraining circle by a jump ball between any two opponents. ART. 3 . . . To start the second, third and fourth quarters, the ball shall be put in play by a throw-in under the alternating-possession procedure.

Page 51 2023-2 4 NFHS Basketball Rules SECTION 3 JUMP-BALL ADMINISTRATION ART. 1 . . . For any jump ball, each jumper shall have both feet within that half of the center restraining circle which is farther from the jumper's basket. ART. 2 . . . When the official is ready and until the ball is tossed, nonjumpers shall not: a. Move onto the center restraining circle. b. Change position around the center restraining circle. ART. 3 . . . Teammates may not occupy adjacent positions around the center restraining circle if an opponent indicates a desire for one of these positions be- fore the official is ready to toss the ball. ART. 4 . . . The ball shall be tossed upward between the jumpers in a plane at right angles to the sidelines. The toss shall be to a height greater than either of them can jump so that it will drop between them. ART. 5 . . . Until the tossed ball is touched by one or both jumpers, nonjumpers shall not: a. Have either foot break the plane of the center restraining circle cylinder. b. Take a position in any occupied space. ART. 6 . . . The tossed ball shall be touched by one or both of the jumpers after it reaches its highest point. If the ball contacts the floor without being touched by at least one of the jumpers, the official shall toss it again. ART. 7 . . . Neither jumper shall: a. Touch the tossed ball before it reaches its highest point. b. Leave the center restraining circle until the ball has been touched. c. Catch the ball before the jump ball ends. d. Touch the ball more than twice. ART. 8 . . . The jump ball and the restrictions in Rule 6-3-7 end when the touched ball contacts one of the eight nonjumpers, an official or the floor. NOTE: During a jump ball, a jumper is not required to face the jumper's own basket, provided the jumper is in the proper half of the center restraining circle. The jumper is also not required to jump and attempt to touch the tossed ball. However, if neither jumper touches the ball it should be tossed again with both jumpers being ordered to jump and try to touch the ball. SECTION 4 ALTERNATING POSSESSION ART. 1 . . . Other than the start of the game and each extra period, the teams will alternate taking the ball out of bounds for a throw-in. The team obtaining control from the jump ball establishes the alternating-possession procedure, and the arrow is set toward the opponent's basket. Control may also be established by the results of a violation or foul, as in Rule 4-3. ART. 2 . . . To start the second, third and fourth quarters, the throw-in shall be from out of bounds at the division line opposite the scorer's and timer's table. Rule 6-3

Rule 6-5 2023-24 NFHS Basketball Rules ART. 3 . . . Alternating-possession throw-ins shall be from: a. One of the four designated spots nearest to where the ball was located if possession is retained or gained in the team's frontcourt. (Diagram 5) b. The out-of-bounds spot nearest to where the ball was located if possession is retained or gained in the team's backcourt. ART. 4 . . . An alternating-possession throw-in shall result when: a. A held ball occurs. b. The ball goes out of bounds, as in Rule 7-3. c. Simultaneous floor or free-throw violations occur. d. A live ball lodges between the backboard and ring or comes to rest on the flange, unless a free throw or throw-in follows. e. Opponents commit simultaneous basket-interference violations. f. The point of interruption cannot be determined as in Rule 4-36-2c. NOTE: When the alternating-possession procedure has not been established, the jump ball shall be in the center restraining circle between the two players involved in the pre- vious action. ART. 5 . . . The direction of the possession arrow is reversed immediately af- ter an alternating-possession throw-in ends. An alternating-possession throw-in ends when the throw-in ends, as in Rule 4-42-5. ART. 6 . . . The opportunity to make an alternating-possession throw-in is lost if the throw-in team violates. If either team fouls during an alternating-possession throw-in, it does not cause the throw-in team to lose the possession arrow. If the defensive team commits a violation during the throw-in, the possession arrow is not switched. SECTION 5 BALL IN PLAY BY THROW-IN The ball shall be put in play by a throw-in under circumstances as outlined in Rules 6-4-1, 6-4-2, 6-4-4; Rules 7-1 through 7-6; Rule 8-5; and Rules 9-1 through 9-13. SECTION 6 BALL IN PLAY BY FREE THROW The ball shall be put in play by placing it at the disposal of the free thrower before each free throw. SECTION 7 DEAD BALL The ball becomes dead, or remains dead, when: ART. 1 . . . A goal, as in Rule 5-1, is made. ART. 2 . . . It is apparent the free throw will not be successful on a: a. Free throw which is to be followed by another free throw. b. Free throw which is to be followed by a throw-in. ART. 3 . . . A held ball occurs, or the ball lodges between the backboard and ring or comes to rest on the flange. ART. 4 . . . A player-control or team-control foul occurs. Page 52

Page 53 2023-2 4 NFHS Basketball Rules Rule 7-1 ART. 5 . . . An official's whistle is blown (see EXCEPTIONS a and b below). ART. 6 . . . Time expires for a quarter or extra period (see EXCEPTION a below). ART. 7 . . . A foul, other than player-control or team-control, occurs (see EX- CEPTIONS a, b and c below). ART. 8 . . . A free-throw violation by the throwing team, as in Rule 9-1, occurs. ART. 9 . . . A violation, as in Rules 9-2 through 13, occurs (see EXCEPTION d below). EXCEPTION: The ball does not become dead until the try or tap for field goal ends, or until the airborne shooter returns to the floor, when: a. Article 5, 6, or 7 occurs while a try or tap for a field goal is in flight. b. Article 5 or 7 occurs while a try for a free throw is in flight. c. Article 7 occurs by any opponent of a player who has started a try or tap for field goal (is in the act of shooting) before the foul occurred, provided time did not expire before the ball was in flight. The trying motion shall be continuous and begins after the ball comes to rest in the player's hand(s) on a try or touches the hand(s) on a tap, and is completed when the ball is clearly in flight. The trying motion may include arm, foot or body movements used by the player when throwing the ball at the player's basket. d. Article 9 as in Rules 9-3-3 or 9-13-1, occurs by an opponent. NOTE: If A1's try or tap for field goal is legally touched in flight, the goal counts if made, if the period /quarter ends before or after the legal touching. If the touching is interfer- ence or goaltending by Team A, no points are scored. If Team B violates, the points are awarded – either two or three depending on whether it was a two or three-point try or tap for field goal.