
Rule 7 Out of Bounds and the Throw-in SECTION 1 OUT-OF-BOUNDS – PLAYER, BALL ART. 1 . . . A player is out of bounds when the player touches the floor, or any object other than a player/person, on or outside a boundary. For location/status of a player in the air, see Rule 4-35. ART. 2 . . . The ball is out of bounds: a. When it touches or is touched by: 1. A player who is out of bounds. 2. Any other person, the floor, or any object on or outside a boundary. 3. The supports or back of the backboard. 4. The ceiling, overhead equipment or supports. b. When it passes over a rectangular backboard. SECTION 2 CAUSING THE BALL TO GO OUT OF BOUNDS – INDIVIDUAL PLAYER ART. 1 . . . The ball is caused to go out of bounds by the last player in bounds to touch it or be touched by it, unless the ball touches a player who is out of bounds prior to touching something out of bounds other than a player.

Rule 7-3 2023-24 NFHS Basketball Rules Page 54 ART. 2 . . . If the ball is out of bounds because of touching or being touched by a player who is on or outside a boundary line, such player causes it to go out. SECTION 3 CAUSING THE BALL TO GO OUT OF BOUNDS – SIMULTANEOUSLY ART. 1 . . . If the ball goes out of bounds and was last touched simultaneously by two opponents, both of whom are inbounds or out of bounds, or if the official is in doubt as to who last touched the ball or if the officials disagree, play shall be resumed by the team entitled to the alternating-possession throw-in at the spot out of bounds nearest to where the simultaneous violation occurred. ART. 2 . . . If the alternating-possession procedure has not been established, play shall be resumed by a jump ball between the two players involved in the center restraining circle. SECTION 4 BALL AWARDED OUT OF BOUNDS The ball is awarded out of bounds after: ART. 1 . . . A violation, as in Rules 9-1 through 13. ART. 2 . . . A free throw for a technical foul, or a flagrant or intentional personal foul, as in Rules 8-5-2 and 8-5-3. ART. 3 . . . A field goal or a successful free throw for any other personal foul as in Rule 8-5-1 or an awarded goal, as in Rules 9-11 and 9-12. ART. 4 . . . The ball becomes dead while a team is in control, provided no infraction or the end of a quarter/period is involved. ART. 5 . . . A player-control or team-control foul. ART. 6 . . . A common foul before the bonus rule is in effect. ART. 7 . . . A held ball, as in Rule 4-25, after the alternating-possession proce- dure has been established. SECTION 5 RESUMPTION-OF-PLAY PROCEDURE, THROW-INS ART. 1 . . . When a team does not make a thrower available, after a time-out (as in Rule 7-4-4) or the intermission between any quarter (as in Rule 6-2-3), the resumption-of-play procedure is used to prevent delay. The administering official will sound the whistle to indicate play will resume. In each situation: a. The ball shall be put in play if Team A is ready or it shall be placed on the floor. b. The throw-in count shall begin and if a violation occurs, the procedure will be repeated for Team B. c. Following a violation by one team only, if that team continues to delay when authorized to make a throw-in, it is a technical foul. d. Following a violation by both teams, any further delay by either team is a technical foul. ART. 2 . . . After an out-of-bounds violation in either the frontcourt or the back- court by either team as in 9-3, the throw-in shall be at the designated spot nearest to where the ball went out of bounds.

Page 55 2023-2 4 NFHS Basketball Rules Rule 7-5 ART. 3 . . . After a violation (9-4 through 9-13) by either team, a foul by either team before the bonus is in effect or any other stoppage in play, the throw-in lo- cation will be determined by the location of the violation/foul or the location of the ball when the stoppage occurs: a. If the throw-in is to be in the team's frontcourt, it shall be at either the near- est 28-foot mark along each sideline or the nearest spot 3-feet outside the lane line along the end line. (Diagram 5) b. If the throw-in is to be in the team's backcourt, the throw-in shall be at the designated spot nearest to where the foul, violation or other stoppage in play occurred. ART. 4 . . . Officials shall determine the designated spot by using an imaginary line drawn from the intersection of the end line with the sideline to each lane line where it intersects with the free-throw line including the semicircle. If the stoppage of play occurs inside the imaginary line, the designated spot shall be the nearest point on the end line 3-feet outside the lane line. (See Number 1 on Diagram 5.) If the stoppage occurs outside the imaginary line, the designated spot shall be the nearest sideline at the 28-foot line. (See Number 2 on Diagram 5.) DIAGRAM 5

Rule 7-6 2023-24 NFHS Basketball Rules Page 56 ART. 5 . . . Designated out-of-bounds spot throw-in behind the backboard shall be made from the nearer free-throw lane line extended. ART. 6 . . . Designated out-of-bounds spot throw-in at the division line oppo- site the scorer's and timer's table: a. After a technical foul, as in Rule 4-19-5, any player of the team to whom the free throws have been awarded shall make the throw-in. b. For an alternating-possession throw-in to start the second, third and fourth quarters, any player from the team with the possession arrow shall make the throw-in. ART. 7 . . . A throw-in anywhere along the end line after a goal or an awarded goal for basket interference or goaltending by a defensive player, as in Rule 9-12 PENALTY 1, the team not credited with the score shall make a throw-in from the end of the court where the goal was made and from any point outside the end line, the officials shall signal such. a. Any player of the team may make a direct throw-in or may pass the ball along the end line to a teammate(s) outside the boundary. b. A team retains this privilege if the scoring team commits a violation or com- mon foul (before the throw-in ends and before the bonus rule is in effect) and the ensuing throw-in spot would have been on the end line. SECTION 6 THROW-IN ADMINISTRATION ART. 1 . . . The official shall hand or bounce the ball to the thrower for a throw- in unless the throw-in is from outside an end line following a successful goal. ART. 2 . . . The throw-in begins when the ball is at the disposal of a player of the team entitled to the throw-in. The thrower shall release the ball on a pass directly into the court, except as in Rule 7-5-7, within five seconds after the throw-in be- gins. The throw-in pass shall touch another player (inbounds or out of bounds) on the court before going out of bounds untouched. The throw-in pass shall not touch a teammate while it is on the out-of-bounds side of the throw-in boundary plane. ART. 3 . . . The thrower shall not leave the designated throw-in spot until the ball has been released on a throw-in pass. (4-42-6) ART. 4 . . . The opponent(s) of the thrower shall not have any body part through the inbounds side of the throw-in boundary plane until the ball has been released on a throw-in pass. (9-2-10 PENALTY) NOTE: The thrower shall have a minimum of 3 feet horizontally as in Rule 1-2-2. If the court is not marked accordingly, an imaginary restraining line shall be imposed by the administering official. ART. 5 . . . Teammates shall not occupy adjacent positions which are parallel to and within 3 feet of the boundary line if an opponent desires one of the positions. The 3-foot restraining line is sometimes the temporary boundary line as in Rule 1-2-2. ART. 6 . . . When an official administers a throw-in to the wrong team, the mis- take shall be rectified before the first dead ball after the ball becomes live unless there has been a change of possession.

Page 57 2023-2 4 NFHS Basketball Rules Rule 8-1