Rule 8 Free Throw SECTION 1 FREE-THROW ADMINISTRATION ART. 1 . . . When a free throw is awarded, the ball shall be placed at the dispos- al of the free thrower (bounced) by the administering official and the free throw count shall begin. Either or both teams may be charged with a violation. ART. 2 . . . Following a time-out or intermission, the resumption-of-play pro- cedure may be used to prevent delay. The administering official shall sound the whistle to indicate play will resume. The ball shall be placed at the disposal of the thrower or placed on the floor at the free-throw line and the count shall begin. Either or both teams may be charged with a violation. Following a violation by one or both teams, if the offending team(s) continues to delay, a team technical foul shall be ruled. ART. 3 . . . If the ball is to become dead when the last free throw for a specific penalty is not successful, players shall not occupy any spaces along the free- throw lane lines. ART. 4 . . . During a free throw, lane spaces may be occupied as follows: a. Marked lane spaces may be occupied by a maximum of two offensive play- ers; four defensive players may occupy lane spaces. b. The first marked lane spaces on each side of the lane, above and adja- cent to the first lane-space marks, shall be occupied by opponents of the free thrower. No teammate of the free thrower shall occupy either of these marked lane spaces. c. The second marked lane spaces on each side may be occupied by team- mates of the free thrower. d. The third marked lane spaces on each side, nearest the free thrower, may be occupied by the opponents of the free thrower. e. Players shall be permitted to move along and across the lane to occupy a vacant marked lane space within the limitations listed in this rule. f. Not more than one player may occupy any part of a marked lane space. ART. 5 . . . Any player, other than the free thrower, who does not occupy a marked lane space shall be behind the free-throw line extended and behind the three-point line. SECTION 2 ATTEMPTING PERSONAL-FOUL FREE THROWS The free throw(s) awarded because of a personal foul shall be attempted by the offended player. If such player shall withdraw because of an injury or disqual- ification, the offended player's substitute shall attempt the throw(s) unless no substitute is available, in which case any teammate may attempt the throw(s) as selected by the team captain or head coach.

Rule 9-1 2023-24 NFHS Basketball Rules Page 58 SECTION 3 ATTEMPTING TECHNICAL-FOUL FREE THROWS The free throws awarded because of a technical foul may be attempted by any player of the offended team, including an eligible substitute or designated starter. The coach or captain shall designate the free thrower(s). SECTION 4 TEN-SECOND LIMIT The try for goal shall be made within 10 seconds after the ball has been placed at the disposal of the free thrower at the free-throw line. This shall apply to each free throw. SECTION 5 RESUMING PLAY WITH THROW-IN After a free throw which is not followed by another free throw, the ball shall be put in play by a throw-in: ART. 1 . . . As after a field goal, as in Rule 7-5-7, if the try is for a personal foul other than intentional or flagrant, and is successful. ART. 2 . . . By any player of the free-thrower's team from out of bounds at the division line on the side opposite the scorer's and timer's table if the free throw is for a technical foul. ART. 3 . . . By any player of the free-thrower's team from the out-of-bounds spot nearest the foul if the free throw is for an intentional personal foul or flagrant personal foul. SECTION 6 RESUMING PLAY DIFFERENCES ART. 1 . . . If a free throw for a personal foul, other than intentional or flagrant, is unsuccessful, or if there is a multiple throw for a personal foul(s) and the last free throw is unsuccessful, the ball remains live. ART. 2 . . . If there is a multiple throw and both a single personal and single technical foul are involved, the tries shall be attempted in the order in which the related fouls occurred, and if the last try is for a single technical foul, or intentional or flagrant personal foul, the ball shall be put in play by a throw-in. ART. 3 . . . If a false double foul involves any type of single foul and any type of double or simultaneous foul, play is resumed with the penalty for only the single foul, as if the double or simultaneous foul had not occurred. (4-36)