Rule 9 Violations and Penalties SECTION 1 FREE-THROW PROVISIONS ART. 1 . . . The try shall be attempted from within the free-throw semicircle and behind the free-throw line. ART. 2 . . . Teams shall properly occupy marked lane spaces according to number and space requirements.

Page 59 2023-2 4 NFHS Basketball Rules ART. 3 . . . After the ball is placed at the disposal of a free thrower: a. The free thrower shall throw within 10 seconds to cause the ball to enter the basket or touch the ring before the free throw ends. b. The free thrower shall not fake a try, nor shall any player in a marked lane space fake to cause an opponent to violate. c. No opponent shall distract the free thrower. d. No player shall enter a marked lane space or leave a marked lane space by contacting the court outside the 36-inch by 36-inch space until the ball is released. e. The free thrower shall not have either foot beyond the vertical plane of the edge of the free-throw line which is farther from the basket or the free-throw semicircle line until the ball touches the ring or until the free throw ends. f. A player, other than the free thrower, who does not occupy a marked lane space, may not have either foot beyond the vertical plane of the free-throw line extended and the three-point line which is farther from the basket until the ball touches the ring or until the free throw ends. g. A player occupying a marked lane space may not have either foot beyond the vertical plane of the outside edge of any lane boundary, or beyond the vertical plane of any edge of the space (2 inches by 36 inches) designated by lane-space marks. A player shall position one foot near the outer edge of the free-throw lane line. The other foot may be positioned anywhere within the designated 36-inch lane space until the ball has been released. h. Players occupying marked free-throw lane lines spaces may not enter the free- throw semicircle until the ball touches the ring or until the free throw ends. PENALTIES: (Section 1) 1. If the first or only violation is by the free thrower or a teammate, the ball becomes dead when the violation occurs, and no point can be scored by that throw. The following out-of-bounds provisions apply if no further free throws are to be administered: a. If the violation occurs during a free throw for a personal foul, other than intentional or flagrant, the ball is awarded to the opponents for a throw-in from the designated out-of-bounds spot nearest the violation. b. If the violation occurs during a free throw for a technical foul, the ball is awarded to the thrower's team for a throw-in at the division line on the side of the court opposite the scorer's and timer's table. c. Iftheviolationoccursduringafreethrowforaflagrantpersonalfoulor an intentional personal foul, the ball is awarded to the thrower's team for a throw-in from the designated out-of-bounds spot nearest the foul. 2. If the violation is by the free-thrower's opponent only: a. If the try is successful, the goal counts and the violation is disregarded. b. If the try is not successful, the ball becomes dead when the free throw ends, and a substitute throw shall be attempted by the same free thrower under the same conditions as for the free throw for which it is substituted. Rule 9-1

Rule 9-2 2023-24 NFHS Basketball Rules Page 60 3. If there is a simultaneous violation by each team, the ball becomes dead and no point can be scored. Remaining free throws are administered or play is resumed by the team entitled to the alternating-possession throw-in in one of the following ways: a. If the free thrower's team retains possession, the throw-in will be at one of the four designated spots nearest the simultaneous violation. (Diagram 5) b. If the opponent gains possession, the throw-in will be at the spot nearest the simultaneous violation. 4. If there is a violation first by the free-thrower's opponent followed by the free thrower or a teammate: a. If both offenders are in a marked lane-space, the second violation is ignored, as in penalty item (2). b. If the second violation is by the free thrower or a teammate behind the free-throw line extended and/or the three-point line, both viola- tions are penalized, as in penalty item (3). c. If a violation by the free thrower follows distraction by an opponent, a substitute free throw shall be awarded. d. If a fake by an opponent causes the free thrower or a teammate of the free thrower to violate, only the fake is penalized. SECTION 2 THROW-IN PROVISIONS ART. 1 . . . The thrower shall not leave the designated throw-in spot until the ball has been released on a throw-in pass. ART. 2 . . . The ball shall be passed by the thrower directly into the court from out-of-bounds so it touches or is touched by another player (inbounds or out of bounds) on the court before going out of bounds untouched. ART. 3 . . . The thrown ball shall not be touched by a teammate of the thrower while the ball is on the out-of-bounds side of the throw-in boundary-line plane, except as in Rule 7-5-7. ART. 4 . . . Once the throw-in starts, the ball shall be released on a pass directly into the court before five seconds have elapsed. ART. 5 . . . The thrower shall not carry the ball onto the court. ART. 6 . . . The thrown ball shall not touch the thrower in the court before it touches or is touched by another player. ART. 7 . . . The thrown ball shall not enter the basket before it touches or is touched by another player. ART. 8 . . . The thrown ball shall not become lodged between the backboard and ring or come to rest on the flange before it touches or is touched by another player. ART. 9 . . . The thrower shall not be replaced by a teammate after the ball is at the thrower's disposal, except as in Rule 7-5-7.

Page 61 2023-2 4 NFHS Basketball Rules Rule 9-3 ART. 10 . . . The opponent(s) of the thrower shall not have any body part through the inbounds side of the throw-in boundary-line plane until the ball has been released on a throw-in pass. NOTE: The thrower may penetrate the plane provided the thrower does not touch the inbounds area or a player inbounds before the ball is released on the throw-in pass. The opponent in this situation may legally touch or grasp the ball. PENALTIES: (Art. 10) 1. The first violation of the throw-in boundary-line plane by an opponent(s) of the thrower shall result in a team warning for delay being given (one delay warning per team per game). The warning does not result in the loss of the opportunity to move along the end line when and if applicable. 2. The second or additional violations will result in a technical foul as- sessed to the offending team. (10-2-1c PENALTY) 3. If an opponent(s) reaches through the throw-in boundary-line plane and touches or dislodges the ball while in possession of the thrower or being passed to a teammate outside the boundary line (as in Rule 7-5-7), a technical foul shall be charged to the offender. No warning for delay required. (10-4-10 PENALTY) 4. If an opponent(s) contacts the thrower, an intentional personal foul shall be charged to the offender. No warning for delay required. ART. 11 . . . No teammate of the thrower shall be out of bounds after a desig- nated-spot throw-in begins. PENALTY: (Section 2) The ball becomes dead when the violation or technical foul occurs. Following a violation, the ball is awarded to the opponents for a throw-in at the original throw-in spot. SECTION 3 OUT OF BOUNDS ART. 1 . . . A player shall not cause the ball to go out of bounds. NOTE: The dribbler has committed a violation if the dribbler steps on or outside a bound- ary, even though the dribbler is not touching the ball while the dribbler is out of bounds. ART. 2 . . . A player shall not be out of bounds when a player touches or is touched by the ball after it has been released on a throw-in pass. ART. 3 . . . A player shall not step out of bounds under the player's own volition and then become the first player to touch the ball after returning to the playing court or to avoid a violation. PENALTY: (Section 3) The ball is dead when the violation occurs and is award- ed to the opponents for a throw-in from the designated out-of-bounds spot nearest the violation. (6-7-9 EXCEPTION d)

Rule 9-4 2023-24 NFHS Basketball Rules Page 62 SECTION 4 TRAVEL, KICK, FIST, BALL ENTERS BASKET FROM BELOW A player shall not travel with the ball, as in Rule 4-44, intentionally kick it, as in Rule 4-29, strike it with the fist or cause it to enter and pass through the basket from below. NOTE: Kicking the ball is a violation only when it is an intentional act; accidentally striking the ball with the foot or leg is not a violation. PENALTIES: The ball is dead when the violation occurs. 1. When the opponent is awarded possession in their frontcourt, the throw-in will be at one of the four designated spots nearest the violation. (Diagram 5) 2. When the opponent is awarded possession in their backcourt, the throw- in will be from the designated out-of-bounds spot nearest the violation. SECTION 5 ILLEGAL DRIBBLE A player shall not dribble a second time after the player's first dribble has ended, unless it is after the player has lost control because of: ART. 1 . . . A try for field goal. ART. 2 . . . A touch by an opponent. ART. 3 . . . A pass or fumble which has then touched, or been touched by, another player. PENALTIES: (Section 5) The ball is dead when the violation occurs. 1. When the opponent is awarded possession in their frontcourt, the throw-in will be at one of the four designated spots nearest the violation. (Diagram 5) 2. When the opponent is awarded possession in their backcourt, the throw- in will be from the designated out-of-bounds spot nearest the violation. SECTION 6 JUMP BALL A player shall not violate any provision of the jump ball (6-3). If both teams simultaneously commit violations during the jump ball or if the official makes a bad toss, the toss shall be repeated. PENALTIES: The ball is dead when the violation occurs. 1. When the opponent is awarded possession in their frontcourt, the throw-in will be at one of the four designated spots nearest the violation. (Diagram 5) 2. When the opponent is awarded possession in their backcourt, the throw- in will be from the designated out-of-bounds spot nearest the violation. SECTION 7 THREE SECONDS ART. 1 . . . A player shall not remain for three seconds in that part of the play- er's free-throw lane between the end line and the farther edge of the free-throw line while the ball is in control of the player's team in the team's frontcourt. ART. 2 . . . The three-second restriction applies to a player who has only one foot touching the lane boundary. The line is part of the lane. All lines designating the free-throw lane, but not lane-space marks, are part of the lane.

Page 63 2023-2 4 NFHS Basketball Rules Rule 9-8 ART. 3 . . . Allowance shall be made for a player who, having been in the re- stricted area for less than three seconds, dribbles in or moves immediately to try for field goal. PENALTY: (Section 7) The ball is dead when the violation occurs and is award- ed to the opponents for a throw-in from the designated out-of-bounds spot nearest the violation. SECTION 8 TEN SECONDS A player shall not be, nor may the player's team be, in continuous control of the ball which is in the team's backcourt for 10 seconds. PENALTY: The ball is dead when the violation occurs. The opponent is award- ed a possession throw-in in its frontcourt at one of the four designated spots nearest the violation. (Diagram 5) SECTION 9 BACKCOURT ART. 1 . . . A player shall not be the first to touch the ball after it has been in team control in the frontcourt, if the player or a teammate last touched or was touched by the ball in the frontcourt before it went to the backcourt. EXCEPTION: A ball in team control of Team A in the frontcourt that is deflected by a de- fensive player, which causes the ball to go into the backcourt, may be recovered by either team unless the offense was the last to touch the ball before it went into the backcourt. If the offense was last to touch the ball in its frontcourt, only the defense can legally recover the basketball. ART. 2 . . . While in player and team control in its backcourt, a player shall not cause the ball to go from backcourt to frontcourt and return to backcourt, without the ball touching a player in the frontcourt, such that the player or a teammate is the first to touch it in the backcourt. ART. 3 . . . During a jump ball, throw-in or while on defense, a player may le- gally jump from the player's frontcourt, secure control of the ball with both feet off the floor and return to the floor with one or both feet in the backcourt. The player may make a normal landing and it makes no difference whether the first foot down is in the frontcourt or backcourt. PENALTY: (Section 9) The ball is dead when the violation occurs. The opponent is awarded a possession throw-in in its frontcourt at one of the four designated spots nearest the violation. (Diagram 5) SECTION 10 CLOSELY GUARDED ART. 1 . . . A player shall not, while closely guarded: a. In the team's frontcourt, hold the ball for five seconds or dribble the ball for five seconds. b. In the team's frontcourt, control the ball for five seconds in an area en- closed by screening teammates.

Rule 9-11 2023-24 NFHS Basketball Rules Page 64 ART. 2 . . . A closely guarded count shall not be started during an interrupted dribble. ART. 3 . . . A closely guarded count shall be terminated during an interrupted dribble. PENALTY: (Section 10) The ball is dead when the violation occurs and is awarded to the opponent for a throw-in from the designated out-of-bounds spot nearest the violation. SECTION 11 BASKET INTERFERENCE A player shall not commit basket interference as in Rule 4-6. SECTION 12 GOALTENDING A player shall not commit goaltending, as in Rule 4-22. PENALTIES: (Sections 11-12) 1. If the violation is at the opponent's basket, the opponents are awarded one point if during a free throw, three points if during a three-point try and two points in any other case. See Rule 10-4-9 for additional penalty for goaltending during a free throw. The crediting of the score and subse- quent procedure are the same as if the awarded score had resulted from the ball having gone into the basket, except that the official shall hand or bounce the ball to a player of the team entitled to the throw-in. 2. If the violation is at a team's own basket, no points can be scored, and the ball is awarded to the opponents for a throw-in from the designated out-of-bounds spot nearest the violation. See Rule 10-4-9 for additional penalty for goaltending during a free throw. 3. If the violation results from touching the ball while it is in the basket after entering from below, no points are scored. a. If the defensive team commits the violation, the opponent is awarded a possession throw-in in its frontcourt at one of the four designated spots nearest the violation. (Diagram 5) b. If the offensive team commits the violation, the opponent is awarded a possession throw-in in its backcourt from the designated out-of- bounds spot nearest the violation. 4. If there is a violation by both teams, play shall be resumed by the team entitled to the alternating-possession throw-in. a. If the offensive team retains possession, it is awarded a possession throw-in in its frontcourt at one of the four designated spots nearest the violation. (Diagram 5) b. If the defensive team gains possession, it is awarded a possession throw-in in its backcourt from the designated out-of-bounds spot nearest the violation.

Page 65 2023-2 4 NFHS Basketball Rules Rule 10-1 SECTION 13 EXCESSIVE SWINGING OF ARM(S)/ELBOW(S) ART. 1 . . . A player shall not excessively swing a player's own arms(s) or elbow(s), even without contacting an opponent. ART. 2 . . . A player may extend arm(s) or elbow(s) to hold the ball under the chin or against the body. ART. 3 . . . Action of arm(s) and elbow(s) resulting from total body movements as in pivoting or movement of the ball incidental to feinting with it, releasing it, or moving it to prevent a held ball or loss of control shall not be considered excessive. PENALTIES: (Section 13) The ball is dead when the violation occurs. 1. When the opponent is awarded possession in its frontcourt, the throw-in will be at one of the four designated spots nearest the violation. (Diagram 5) 2. When the opponent is awarded possession in its backcourt, the throw-in will be from the designated out-of-bounds spot nearest the violation. (6- 7-9 EXCEPTION d)